hello mass funds I'm incredibly excited
to announce a brand new series where I'm
going to be delving into the wild world
of GCSE maths now of course I cannot do
this by myself I need the help of an
excellent secondary school teacher
introducing mr. Bobby Siegel I couldn't
do this without my fellow mass appeal
podcast co-host miss Susan okay
[Music]
right team students friends hello sir
colleagues so we are going to talk about
distance time graphs or travel graphs
and instead of just doing a plain old
distance time graph we're gonna do Usain
Bolt's this last one you think you're
gonna do somebody moving a distance in a
certain amount of time why not do the
fastest human being on the planet no
let's go big so Usain Bolt is let's see
most famous for the hundred meters and
kicking you know his world record time
four hundred meters it is indeed nine
point five eight seconds so if we call
this nine point five eight yep then we
want to put a dot or a little cross at a
point on my graph so he's gone 100
meters in nine point five eight seconds
so that crosses you think this cross is
where you saying is as he finishes as he
and he starts of course at zero meters
at zero seconds as the gun goes he's on
the start line
that's a zero buying off he pops sending
his world record as he does now when he
gets to the end he's pretty tired
hmm I think we're gonna go most people
little bit shops after running a hundred
meters in 9.5 eight seconds so he's
gonna have a little rest
so he's ran to the finish line he
stopped perfectly on 100 meters and he's
laid out on so but the key thing is his
distance is not changing but time
continues to increase so in ten seconds
after that time let's say down here at
nineteen point five eight he's still at
the same distance because he's gonna
line at the 10-second spin line there
yeah exactly
no way at all he is just totally
nice time and now he realizes that he's
set his world record and he's really
happy and so what he's gonna do is he's
gonna get up and he's gonna slowly walk
back to where he started shoes off in
his hands exactly you know why not just
know with a Jamaican flag maybe here's
some chicken nugget come back he's gonna
get there let's call this sixty point
five eight oh yeah so he's taken a total
of what would that be to travel those
two run back to the stubble you ones 41
seconds go back to the start now how do
we know that he's going more slowly when
he comes back it does take a longer time
so here he's around a hundred meters and
then he hasn't moved and then he's gone
back to the start
so the distance he's moved here is back
to the start of the track yeah but
instead of doing it in nine point five
eight seconds understand it in 41
seconds and now how can we even without
knowing the numbers how can we tell that
he's going slower on the way back just
from the graph the steepness of the line
exactly so what does the the steepness
or the greedy and the slope of the line
what does that represent speed exactly
it's his speed so here he's going really
quick so this is a really steep line
yeah and this one is flat so what's his
speed when the line is flat because he's
lying on the floor and then he of course
sauce go back to the beginning but it's
more slowly yeah so we have this line is
less steep the beginning so now let's
try and do the same thing for the two
hundred meters okay so I knew guys going
to do this one
so lucky you suggested the timing okay
so first of all we're going to hundred
meters okay and we'll record Bobby
19 okay so 19 point one nine two hundred
meters so okay now season in recharge of
the pen oh dear okay sure so remember
what happens when you stay in completes
his race he falls down and has a lighter
he does he has a rest for about ten
seconds again let's say ten seconds
let's say he has a consistent yeah oh
it's a ten things a little bit less than
that yeah so that would be twenty nine
nineteen yeah why were you trying to
line them up because he's lying down
here so he's distance doesn't change
this time still continues to increase
but his distance doesn't change perfect
Bobby and now we're going back to the
beginning because now we've done he's
celebrating and we know he takes a lot
longer to celebrate so that's let's say
he takes another well let's say he does
it again in 41 so what time will he get
back to the beginning so we it would
take him was seventeen point one nine
seconds well then total from the start
yes so 70.1 died and he would back to
the start and so we need to fill in how
his distance will change so you started
he's at 200 meters in front as Grace had
a cheer for what ten seconds Susan and
now he is coming back ambling yeah to
start by saying hello to everyone hello
in waiting selfies yeah exactly
okay perfect so if we look at these two
hmm together here we're at 200 meters
and it's taken you saying 41 seconds way
back to the start and after the 100
meter race it's also taken him 41
seconds to get back to the start so in
terms of going back to the start the
speeds which one is going faster so
we're both trying the same this one is
family for love them the same time
yeah the distance is more here yes
actually he's gonna be going twice he's
got 200 meters in 41 seconds yeah
compared to say a world record to two
meters how he's still gonna come back in
40 seconds
[Music]
okay thank you mr. Tom Crawford dr. Tom
girlfriend for his lesson on
understanding speed distance time the
first circumstances he was running what
race so we had the normal distance time
graph and what goes in the x-axis here
are meters and what was the time they
bought and obviously in the lesson we
progressed look at and stopping relaxing
this so this particular bet how do you
work out his speed for their average
speed for the race this is over time yes
so that's gonna be we think about what
it is on the graph it's the change in Y
oh yeah hundred meters over nine point
five eight seconds and again we're the
calculated because mathematicians are
not calculate this we have a method that
has his speed meters in but he starts at
zero yeah you guys families it starts at
zero speed
yeah so they may have new styles these
are after the first about 20 meters he's
sort of steadily picking up pace it's
only picking up pace so that's about 20
meters it's about two around two seconds
and then providing the runnings
Stage four about the next 60 meters he's
not powering through powering through so
there he's pretty much got a steady
speed but he's on a top velocity yeah
and then the last bit this is a
extraordinary actually for the last 20
meters
he smells down just a tiny tiny bit but
in the basis you always notice that
other people seem to slow down yeah
that's why so he's slowing down when
they're slowing down so distance gets
lighter yeah so it's like a it's not
much it's like a tiny tiny slowing down
yeah so the question is let's say 20
meters on two seconds what's his speed
can we use can we do 100 divided by nine
point five eight this time so what do we
do this particular point here if you're
in one guys instantaneous speed ah two
seconds if we think about how we did the
first calculation yeah we took the
difference in the y value yes and then
divided by the change in the x value yes
so can we do a similar thing here at
that point so what we do is we have a
gradient this particular points you get
your ruler you try and make sure there's
a same angular either side you must draw
your own little try and go yeah and then
now you can measure what the height is
and that will give you the speed at that
particular point this is each of the
points yes so we can see you say in
Vault he's steady zero increasing speed
to a point where that says further the
the vector is changing speed the
quickest then he's steady for our 60
meters so the gradient actually tells
you the speed at which you simple and
has been different at different parts of
that yes
[Laughter]
[Music]
say Thank You mr. Tom for your lovely
lesson on time travel and having thought
about what you said I kind of went off
and thought what dynamic online
resources could help kind of make this
come alive a bit more so I found
something on geogebra and I've got it's
got the link on it it's a distance
versus time graphs so we just scroll
down and it says table of contents see
that and then there's a variety of
velocity and once I think let's just do
velocity one to click on there there's a
play a pause and a reset yeah photos
Marcus blobs can you click on road
photos Marcus applause okay and if you
do right what's right what comes up is a
road with the car one yeah okay there
photos you see there's not the kind of
picture by Chris on the zero yeah so now
just press play and see what you see
so the distance is increasing constantly
Wernick are we yeah yeah it stops yep
goes flat
no starts to increase again pretty
impressive right mmm so it's putting
into practice what you said okay we go
out of that and go back to the list that
we had before of all the velocity ones
and pick one
oh god gone but we yeah pick one seven
the nation's favorite number according
to Alex bellos the world's favorite
favorite of the nations my I'm gonna go
well maybe my favorite number what we
can do is here we do boat is always
worth seeing what it is can you see this
one there's a bike a convertible on a
truck I was a what you're doing to do
the graph see what the quran star yeah
and then we can see they're making them
then press play and then see with I mean
no it's not smooth all right so what do
you predict to you
and with the blue truck horizontal line
so he's not moving he's got a flat tire
like Bobby Satcher
[Music]
convertible whereas maintaining a steady
speed where it gets a one-stage the the
bike seems to overlap with the favor
take the bike is going to overtake the
convertible because there's one position
where they're both at the same place
exactly right so let's press play and
see whether your predictions are correct
see you see the bike has gone into the
right-hand Lane okay
and now the convertible is overtaking
the tro my goodness this is it's like
Wacky Races a velocity one yeah okay
let's do ten all right so let's press
road so that tell us what we played with
Oh interesting
what is that a little truck convertible
yeah and so I think for me that what do
you think I'm thinking because in the
middle of the road there's gonna be
maybe different durations yeah they they
look like they're going in the opposite
direction again what blue doesn't move
what's that blue has blue is a flat line
again so we know that the blue truck is
not moving yep and then Green goes
backwards and then like a stuck behind
the blue we have a red a moped who is
not yet on the road is popping in after
three seconds going towards them right
so going up and then stopping a little
bit turning around
there's no trunk I think that's going to
come in neck okay if we get out any
yellow yet continue a few seconds down
the line see so this is quite amazing
kind of interesting firm resource so and
it kind of brings to life some stuff
you're talking about
[Music]